The Rope Bridge
---------------


**Contribution of this section**

#. exercise with processes,
#. use of state space exploration for checking properties, and
#. use of advanced visualisation techniques.

**New tools**:
:ref:`tool-ltsview`, :ref:`tool-tracepp`

.. image:: img/bridge.*
   :align: center

In the middle of the night, four adventurers encounter a shabby rope bridge
spanning a deep ravine. For safety reasons, they decide that no more than two
persons should cross the bridge at the same time and that a flashlight needs to
be carried by one of them on every crossing. They have only one flashlight. The
four adventurers are not all equally skilled: crossing the bridge takes them 1,
2, 5 and 10 minutes, respectively. A pair of adventurers cross the bridge in an
amount of time equal to that of the slowest of the two adventurers.

One of the adventurers quickly proclaims that they cannot get all four of them
across in less than 19 minutes. However, one of her companions disagrees and
claims that it can be done in 17 minutes. We shall verify this claim and show
that there is no faster strategy using mCRL2.

The file :download:`bridge-holes.mcrl2 <files/bridge-holes.mcrl2>` contains an
outline for a model of this situation. We will gradually fill the holes in a
number of exercises.

The specification specifies the ``Flashlight`` process, and everything needed
by it, and it gives some clues about the datatypes that are to be used.

First of all, it dicates how the position of the flashlight and the adventurers
should be encoded:

.. literalinclude:: files/bridge-holes.mcrl2
   :language: mcrl2
   :lines: 8-11
   
The following clue is given about the processes describing the adventurers:

.. literalinclude:: files/bridge-holes.mcrl2
   :language: mcrl2
   :lines: 4-6
   
The flashlight process is given by:

.. literalinclude:: files/bridge-holes.mcrl2
   :language: mcrl2
   :lines: 38-49
   
Here the actions ``forward_flashlight`` and ``back_flashlight`` are described
by:

.. literalinclude:: files/bridge-holes.mcrl2
   :language: mcrl2
   :lines: 14-25
   
In the following exercises we will extend the specification towards a full
description of the problem, and we will find out the minimal time needed for
all adventurers to cross the bridge.

.. admonition:: Exercise

  Study the stub specification in :download:`bridge-holes.mcrl2
  <files/bridge-holes.mcrl2>`. Then add the process definition for an
  adventurer. For this, answer the following questions:
  
  * What data parameters will the process have?
  * What actions will the process be able to perform?
  
  You will have to add action declarations and a process definition
  at the places marked ``%%% TODO (Exercise 1):`` in the mCRL2 specification.
  
.. admonition:: Solution
   :class: collapse
   
   The clue in the file gives away that an adventurer is identified by her
   speed. Furthermore, we need to keep track of the position of the adventurer;
   is she at the ``start`` or at the ``finish`` side of the bridge. This gives
   rise to defining an ``Adventurer(speed: Int, pos: Position)``.
   
   The adventurer needs to be able to cross the bridge in two directions;
   forward with another adventurer, and back on his own. Inspired by the actions
   defined for the flashlight, we define the following actions:
   
   .. code-block:: mcrl2
   
      act forward_adventurer: Int # Int;
          back_adventurer: Int;
   
   We combine this into a process in a way similar to the ``Flashlight``
   process. This way we obtain the following definition:
   
   .. code-block:: mcrl2
   
      % Models an adventurer who can move to the other side of the bridge with
      % its designated speed
      proc Adventurer(speed:Int, pos:Position) =
         (pos == start) ->
           sum s:Int . forward_adventurer(speed,s) . Adventurer(speed,finish)
         <> % position == finish
           back_adventurer(speed) . Adventurer(speed,start);
           
   When we look closely at this process, and think about this, the resulting
   state space is more complex than it needs to be. We get two transitions for
   every forward movement of adventurers with speeds ``X`` and ``Y``,
   ``forward(X,Y)`` and ``forward(Y,X)``, both leading to the same state and
   modelling the same event. Because of this, we keep the speeds on the forward
   and backward actions sorted, as is done in the following definition of the
   process.
   
   .. literalinclude:: files/bridge.mcrl2
      :language: mcrl2
      :lines: 33-49

.. admonition:: Exercise

  Add the four adventurers to the initial process definition.
  Apart from adding parallel processes to the definition, you have to
  take care of the synchronisation between actions of these processes:
  
  * Declare actions for the following events:
    
    * Two adventurers and a flashlight move forward over the bridge.
    * One adventurer and a flashlight move back over the bridge.

  * For each of these actions to occur, certain actions of the separate
    processes have to be synchronised. Specify the synchronisation between the
    actions using the *communication operator*, ``comm``.
  * Ensure that only the synchronised actions can occur, using the
    *allow operator*, ``allow``.
    
.. admonition:: Solution
   :class: collapse
   
   Adding the four adventurers to the initial process definition (which already
   contains the flashlight) gives us the following definition:
   
   .. code-block:: mcrl2
   
      init Adventurer(1,start) || Adventurer(2,start)  || 
           Adventurer(5,start) || Adventurer(10,start) || 
           Flashlight(start)
        
   So all adventurers, with their different speeds, as well as the flashlight,
   are at the ``start`` side of the bridge.   
   
   We declare the action ``forward: Int # Int`` for two adventurers and a
   flashlight moving forward over the bridge. The action ``back: Int`` denotes
   one adventurer moving back over the bridge with the flashlight.
   
   Synchronisation of the actions is done using the communication operator.
   Combined with the original initial process, we obtain the following:
   
   .. code-block:: mcrl2
   
      init comm({ forward_adventurer | forward_adventurer
                  | forward_flashlight -> forward,
                  back_adventurer | back_flashlight -> back },
              Adventurer(1,start) || Adventurer(2,start)  || 
              Adventurer(5,start) || Adventurer(10,start) || 
              Flashlight(start));
              
   Now we use the ``allow`` operator to only allow the ``forward`` and
   ``backward`` actions, as follows:
   
   .. literalinclude:: files/bridge.mcrl2
      :language: mcrl2
      :lines: 51-

.. admonition:: Exercise

  Simulate the model using the mCRL2 toolset by executing the following commands:

  * Linearise the specification to obtain an LPS::

    $ mcrl22lps bridge.mcrl2 bridge.lps
    
  * If linearisation fails, try to fix the reported errors.
    Otherwise, start the GUI simulation tool::
    
    $ lpsxsim bridge.lps
    
    The bottom part of the window shows the state parameters along with their
    values in the current state. (The simulator starts in the initial state of
    the system.) The top part shows the actions that can be performed from the
    current state, along with their effects on the parameter values.
  * Simulate the system by executing a sequence of actions. You can execute an
    action by double-clicking it in the list. Notice how the state parameter
    values get updated in the bottom part.
    
  After playing around with the simulator for a while, did you notice any weird
  or incorrect behaviour? If so, try to improve your model of the rope bridge
  and simulate it again.
  
.. admonition:: Solution
   :class: collapse
   
   A complete specification is the following (also available as
   :download:`bridge.mcrl2 <files/bridge.mcrl2>`.
   
   .. literalinclude:: files/bridge.mcrl2
      :language: mcrl2

.. admonition:: Exercise

  Generate the state space of your model by executing the
  following command::
  
  $ lps2lts bridge.lps bridge.svc
  
  The state space can be viewed using the LTSGraph tool::
  
  $ ltsgraph bridge.svc
  
  An alternative, 3D view of the state space can be given by LTSView::
  
  $ ltsview bridge.fsm

.. admonition:: Exercise

  The total amount of time that the adventurers consumed so far, is not yet
  being measured within the model. For this purpose, add a new process to the
  specification, called ``Referee``, which:

  * counts the number of minutes passed and updates this counter every time the
    bridge is crossed by some adventurer(s);
  * reports this number when all adventurers have reached the *finish* side.
    (This implies that it also needs to be able to determine when this happens!)

  You will have to add action declarations, add a ``Referee`` process definition
  and extend the initial process definition, including the communication and
  allow operators.
  
.. admonition:: Solution
   :class: collapse

   A possible definition of the ``Referee`` process is the following.
   
   .. literalinclude:: files/bridge-referee.mcrl2
      :language: mcrl2
      :lines: 50-60
      
   Observe that the referee keeps track of the minutes that have passed, and
   that the ``forward_referee``, ``back_referee`` and ``report`` actions have
   to be added. The ``report`` action is responsible for reporting the
   number of minutes that have passed when all adventurers have reached the far
   side of the bridge.
   
   The initial process needs to be modified to the following, to incorporate
   the referee process.
   
   .. literalinclude:: files/bridge-referee.mcrl2
      :language: mcrl2
      :lines: 63-
   
   The complete specification is available as
   :download:`bridge-referee.mcrl2 <files/bridge-referee.mcrl2>`

We shall now verify the following properties using the toolset:

A. It is possible for all adventurers to reach the `finish` side in 17 minutes.
B. It is not possible for all adventurers to reach the `finish` side in less
   than 17 minutes.

.. admonition:: Exercise

   Express each of these properties in the modal µ-calculus.
   Add the formulas to the files :download:`formula_A.mcf <files/formula_A.mcf>`
   and :download:`formula_B.mcf <files/formula_B.mcf>`
   using a text editor.
   
.. admonition:: Solution
   :class: collapse
   
   Property A can e.g. be expressed using the following formula (available as
   :download:`formula_A-final.mcf <files/formula_A-final.mcf>`):
   
   .. literalinclude:: files/formula_A-final.mcf
      :language: mcrl2
   
   Property B can be expressed using the following formula (available as
   :download:`formula_B-final.mcf <files/formula_B-final.mcf>`):
   
   .. literalinclude:: files/formula_B-final.mcf
      :language: mcrl2
      
   An alternative phrasing for property B is the following:
      
   .. code-block:: mcrl2
      
      forall x:Nat . [true* . report(x)] val(x >= 17)
         
   However, executing :ref:`tool-pbes2bool` does not terminate if this
   phrasing is used.

.. admonition:: Exercise

  Verify the formulas using the toolset.

  * Generate a PBES from your LPS and one of the formulas::

    $ lps2pbes --formula=formula_X.mcf bridge.lps bridge_X.pbes
    
  * Solve the PBES::

    $ pbes2bool bridge_X.pbes

  Alternatively, this can be done with a single command::

    $ lps2pbes --formula=formula_X.mcf bridge.lps | pbes2bool
    
.. admonition:: Solution
   :class: collapse

   This boils down to executing the following commands on :file:`bridge.mcrl2`,
   assuming that this file contains the specification including the ``Referee``
   process::
   
     $ mcrl22lps bridge.mcrl2 bridge.lps
     $ lps2pbes --formula=formula_A.mcf bridge.lps | pbes2bool
     true
     $ lps2pbes --formula=formula_B-final.mcf bridge-referee.lps | pbes2bool
     true
   
A disadvantage of using PBESs for model checking is that insightful diagnostic
information is hard to obtain. We shall now verify both properties again using
the LTS tools.

.. admonition:: Exercise

  Verify the properties by generating traces as follows. Assuming that the
  action that reports the time is called ``report``, execute::
  
  $ lps2lts --action=report -t20 bridge.lps
  
  This outputs a message every time a ``report`` action is encountered during
  state space generation. Also, a trace is written to file for the first 20
  occurrences of this action. Properties A and B can now be checked by observing
  the output messages. Moreover, the trace for property A can be printed by
  passing the corresponding trace file name as an argument to the
  :ref:`tool-tracepp` command, e.g.::
  
  $ tracepp file.trc
  
  This gives an optimal strategy for crossing the bridge in 17 minutes as
  claimed by the computer scientist adventurer.
  
.. admonition:: Solution
   :class: collapse

   The following is the output for our solution::
  
     $ lps2lts --action=report -t20 bridge.lps
     [16:11:01.848 info]    detect: action 'report(50)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_0_report.trc'(state index: 87).
     [16:11:02.271 info]    detect: action 'report(40)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_1_report.trc'(state index: 88).
     [16:11:02.273 info]    detect: action 'report(34)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_2_report.trc'(state index: 89).
     [16:11:02.274 info]    detect: action 'report(33)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_3_report.trc'(state index: 90).
     [16:11:02.276 info]    detect: action 'report(37)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_4_report.trc'(state index: 91).
     [16:11:02.278 info]    detect: action 'report(30)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_5_report.trc'(state index: 92).
     [16:11:02.279 info]    detect: action 'report(24)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_6_report.trc'(state index: 93).
     [16:11:02.281 info]    detect: action 'report(23)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_7_report.trc'(state index: 94).
     [16:11:02.282 info]    detect: action 'report(36)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_8_report.trc'(state index: 95).
     [16:11:02.284 info]    detect: action 'report(27)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_9_report.trc'(state index: 96).
     [16:11:02.286 info]    detect: action 'report(21)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_10_report.trc'(state index: 97).
     [16:11:02.288 info]    detect: action 'report(20)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_11_report.trc'(state index: 98).
     [16:11:02.290 info]    detect: action 'report(26)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_12_report.trc'(state index: 99).
     [16:11:02.292 info]    detect: action 'report(19)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_13_report.trc'(state index: 100).
     [16:11:02.295 info]    detect: action 'report(17)' found and saved to 'bridge-referee.lps_act_14_report.trc'(state index: 101).
    
   So we indeed observe that ``report(17)`` is the trace with the lowest time.
   The optimal trace that we obtain is the following::
  
     $ tracepp bridge-referee.lps_act_14_report.trc  
  
